[Applause]
so what makes a piece of music beautiful
well most musicologists would argue that
repetition is a key aspect of beauty the
idea that we take a melody a motif a
musical idea we repeat it we set up the
expectation for repetition and then we
either realize it or we break the
repetition and that's a key component of
beauty
so if repetition and patterns are key to
beauty then what would the absence of
patterns sound like if we wrote a piece
of music that had no repetition
whatsoever in it that's actually an
interesting mathematical question is it
possible to write a piece of music that
has no repetition whatsoever it's not
random random is easy
repetition free it turns out is
extremely difficult and the only reason
that we can actually do it is because of
a man who is hunting for submarines it
turns out a guy who is trying to develop
the world's perfect sonar ping solve the
problem of writing pattern free music
and that's what the topic of the talk is
today so recall that sonar in sonar you
have a ship that sends out some sound in
the in the water and it listens for an
echo the sound goes down and echoes back
it goes down and echoes back the time it
takes the sound to come back tells you
how far away it is if it comes at a
higher pitch it's because the thing is
moving toward you if it comes back at a
lower pitch it's because it's moving
away from you okay so how would you
design a perfect sonar pain well the in
the 1960s a guy by the name of John
Costas was working on the Navy's
extremely expensive sonar system it
wasn't working and it was because the
ping they were using was inappropriate
it was a paying much like the following
here which is just you can think of this
as as the notes and this is time so that
was the sonar ping they were using a
Down chirp okay it turns out that's a
really bad ping why because it looks
like shifts of itself all right the
relationship between the first two notes
is the same as the second two and so
forth okay so he designed a different
kind of sonar ping one that looks random
these are looked like a random pattern
of
but they're not if you look very
carefully you may notice but in fact the
relationship between each pairs of dots
is distinct
nothing is ever repeated the first two
notes and every other pair of notes have
a different relationship okay so the
fact that we know about these patterns
is is is unusual John Costas is the
inventor of these patterns this is a
picture from 2006 shortly before his
death he was the one that the sonar
engineer working for the Navy he was
thinking about these patterns and he was
by hand able to come up with him to size
12 12 by 12 he couldn't go any further
and he thought maybe they don't exist of
any size bigger than 12 so he wrote a
letter to the mathematician in the
middle who was a young mathematician in
California at the time Solomon Golomb
turns out that Solomon Golomb was one of
the most gifted discreet mathematicians
of our time and John asked Solomon if he
could tell him the right reference to
where these patterns were there was no
reference nobody had ever thought about
a repetition a pattern of free structure
before so Solomon Golomb spent the
summer thinking about the problem and he
relied on the mathematics of this
gentleman here every scale Wow now
Galois is a very famous mathematician
he's famous because he invented a whole
branch of mathematics which bears his
name called Galois field theory it's the
it's the mathematics of prime numbers
he's also famous because of the way that
he died so the story is that he stood up
for the honor of a young woman he was
challenged to a duel and he accepted and
shortly before the duel occurred he
wrote down all of his mathematical ideas
sent letters to all of his friends
saying please please please this is 200
years ago please please please see that
these things get published eventually he
then fought the duel was shot and died
at age 20 the mathematics that runs your
cell phones the internet that allows us
to communicate that DVDs all comes from
the mind of every scale wah a
mathematician who died 20 years young so
when you talk about the legacy that you
leave of course he couldn't have even
anticipated the way that his mathematics
would be used thankfully his mathematics
was eventually published Solomon Golomb
realized that that mathematics was
exactly the mathematics needed to solve
the problem of creating a pattern free
structure
so he sent a letter back to John saying
uh turns out you can generate these
patterns using prime number theory and
John saw then went about and to solve
the problem sonar the sonar problem for
the Navy so what do these patterns look
like again well here's a pattern here
this is an 88 by 88 sized Kostis array
it's generated in a very simple way
elementary school mathematics is
sufficient to solve just to solve this
problem it's generated by repeatedly
multiplying by the number 3 1 3 9 27 81
243 when I get to a bigger that's larger
than 89 which happens to be prime I keep
taking 89 s away until I get back below
and this will eventually fill the entire
grid 88 by 88 there happened to be 88
notes on the piano so today we were
gonna have the world premiere of the
world's first pattern free piano sonata
so back to the question of music so what
makes music beautiful let's think about
one of the most beautiful pieces ever
written Beethoven's fifth symphony and
the famous da da da da motif that motif
occurs hundreds of times in the symphony
hundreds of times in the first movement
alone and also in all the other
movements as well so this repetition the
setting up of this repetition is so
important for beauty so if we think
about random music as being just random
notes here or over here somehow
Beethoven's fifth and some kind of
pattern if we wrote completely pattern
free music it would be way out on the
tail in fact the end of the tail of
music would be these pattern free
structures this music that we still saw
before those stars on the on the grid is
far far far from random it's perfectly
patterned free it turns out that
musicologists a famous composer by the
name of Arnold Schoenberg thought of
this in the 1930s 40s and 50s he his
goal as a composer was to write music
that would free music from tonal
structure that would fit who called it
the emancipation of the dissonance he
created these structures called tone
rows this is a tone row there it sounds
a lot like a Costas array unfortunately
he died ten years before cost to solve
the problem of how you can
mathematically create these structures
so today we are going to hear the world
premiere of the perfect ping this is an
88 by 88 sized Costas array maps and
notes on my piano played using a
structure called a golem ruler for the
rhythm which means that the starting
time of each pair of notes is distinct
as well
this is mathematically almost impossible
actually computationally it would be
impossible to create because of the
mathematics that was developed 200 years
ago through another mathematician
recently at an engineer we are able to
actually compose this or construct this
using multiplication by the number three
the point when you hear this music is
not that it's supposed to be beautiful
this is supposed to be the world's
ugliest piece of music in fact it's it's
music that only a mathematician could
write so when you're listening to this
piece of music I implore you try and
find some repetition try and find
something that you enjoy and then revel
in the fact that you won't find it okay
so without further ado Michael Linville
the director of chamber music at the New
World Symphony will to perform the world
premiere of the perfect ping
[Music]
you